Red Velvet Layer Cake with Cream Cheese Frosting
yield: SERVES 12 prep time: 30 MINUTES total time: 2 HOURS
Here is my favorite recipe for tender and soft red velvet layer cake with cream cheese frosting. Learn all my tricks and tips to perfecting this classic recipe at home! I urge you to read the recipe in full before beginning, as well as reading the recipe notes. It's a lot of text, but I'm careful to explain the recipe as best I can so you can have red velvet success. Enjoy!

Ingredients:

Cake

3 cups (345g) cake flour (spoon & leveled)1
1 teaspoon baking soda
2 Tablespoons (10g) natural unsweetened cocoa powder
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 cup (115g) unsalted butter, softened to room temperature2
2 cups (400g) granulated sugar
1 cup (240ml) canola or vegetable oil
4 large Eggland's Best eggs, room temperature and separated
1 and 1/2 Tablespoons (22ml) vanilla extract
1 teaspoon distilled white vinegar
liquid or gel red food coloring3
1 cup (240ml) buttermilk, room temperature4
Cream Cheese Frosting

16 ounces (450g) full-fat cream cheese, softened to room temperature5
1/2 cup (115g) unsalted butter, softened to room temperature
4 cups (480g) confectioners' sugar
2-3 Tablespoons (30-45ml) cream or milk
2 teaspoons vanilla extract

Directions:

Preheat oven to 350°F (177°C). Spray or lightly butter two 9x2 (deep dish) cake pans6. Set aside.
Make the cake: Whisk the flour, baking soda, cocoa powder, and salt together in a large bowl. Set aside.
Using a handheld or stand mixer fitted with a paddle attachment, beat the butter on high speed until smooth and creamy - about 1 minute. Add the sugar and beat on high speed for 2 minutes until creamed together fairly well. Scrape down the sides and up the bottom of the bowl with a rubber spatula as needed. Add the oil and beat on high for 2 minutes. The butter may look "piece-y" and not completely combine with the oil. This is normal and ok.
Add four egg yolks and the vanilla. (Set the egg whites aside.) Beat on medium-high speed until combined. Scrape down the sides and up the bottom of the bowl with a rubber spatula as needed. Beat in the vinegar and the food coloring-- until you reach your desired color. I used 3 and 1/2 Tablespoons. With the mixer on low speed, add the dry ingredients in three additions alternating with the buttermilk, beginning and ending with the dry ingredients, and mixing each addition just until incorporated. Do not overmix. Vigorously whisk or beat the 4 egg whites until thick and foamy as pictured above, about 3 minutes. Fold into cake batter with a rubber spatula or wooden spoon. The batter will be silky and slightly thick. (If there are still small pieces of butter - again, this is ok. They will melt inside as the cakes bake. Making them even more buttery tasting.)
Pour batter into cake pans filling 2/3 of the way full. Bake for 30-32 minutes or until the tops of the cakes spring back when gently touched and a toothpick inserted in the center comes out clean. If the cakes need a little longer as judged by wet crumbs on the toothpick, bake them for longer. However do not overbake; your cakes may dry out. Remove from the oven and allow cakes to cool in the pans set on a wire rack. Cool them completely.
Make the frosting: In a large bowl using a handheld or stand mixer fitted with a whisk or paddle attachment, beat the cream cheese and butter together on medium speed until smooth, about 2 minutes. Add the confectioners’ sugar and 2 Tablespoons of cream. Beat for 2 minutes. Add the vanilla and 1 more Tablespoon cream if needed to thin out. Beat on high for 2 full minutes. Taste the frosting and add a pinch of salt if it is too sweet.
Assemble and frost: First, using a large serrated knife, slice a thin layer off the tops of the cakes to create a flat surface. Set these thin pieces of cake aside. Place 1 cake layer on your cake stand or serving plate. Evenly cover the top with frosting. Top with 2nd layer and spread remaining frosting all over the top and sides. Crumble the thin pieces of cake you sliced off in a large bowl. Decorate the sides and top edges of the cake with these crumbs-- this is optional! Slice and serve.
Cover extras up tightly and store at room temperature or in the refrigerator for up to 3 days. Unfrosted cake remains fresh covered tightly at room temperature for 3-4 days. Store frosted cakes in the refrigerator for up to 7 days and allow to come to room temperature before serving.
Make ahead tip: Prepare cakes and frosting 1 day in advance. Keep cakes at room temperature, covered tightly. Refrigerate prepared frosting in an airtight container until ready to use. Frosted or unfrosted cakes may be frozen up to 2 months, thaw overnight in the refrigerator and bring to room temperature if desired before serving.

Recipe Notes:

I strongly urge you to use cake flour in this cake recipe. If you absolutely cannot get ahold of it, a mix of all-purpose and cornstarch is fine. Sift together 2 and 2/3 cups (333g) all-purpose flour + 1/3 cup (40g) cornstarch and use this instead of cake flour. Sifting them is imperative.
Why so many room temperature ingredients? When everything is near the same temperature, they mix together easily, evenly, and produce a uniform texture among the cake.
The amount of red food coloring is up to you. I tested with varying amounts. To get the dark red color you see here, use 3 and 1/2 Tablespoons of liquid food coloring. Dye the batter until you are pleased with the color. Of course, you don't have to dye the batter at all if you don't want to. I have never tested this recipe with a natural alternative.
Buttermilk is required. I used low-fat because that's what I typically have, but full fat buttermilk is fine here. You may make your own "DIY" buttermilk and use it instead. To do so, add 1 teaspoon of fresh lemon juice or white vinegar to a liquid measuring cup. Add enough regular milk (skim, 1%, 2%, or whole) to make 1 cup. Stir the two together and let sit for 5 minutes. This soured milk may be used instead of buttermilk in step 4.
Use brick-style cream cheese. Not cream cheese spread.
If you'd like to make a 3 layer cake (if you do not have 9x2 deep dish cake pans or simply want a 3 layer cake), pour the batter evenly into 3 pans and bake for around 20-24 minutes, give or take.